Hey, so I've recently started working
with a few AI consultants from the big
four of consulting firms. If you guys
are unfamiliar, that's Deote, PWC, EEY,
and KPMG. They are pretty expensive.
Some of the management consulting guys
get up to over $300,000 a year. I'm
doing this primarily for my own agency,
Leftclick, to see if there's any juice
that I could squeeze out of them, ways
that I could price higher and so on and
so forth. But also, as somebody that
never went to school for any of this
stuff, management consulting or
otherwise, I'm interested in knowing how
real consultants that work with
multi-billion dollar companies and
stakeholders identify and then address
real business problems. So, I've learned
quite a bit. And what I want to do in
this video is I want to show you the key
AI consulting frameworks that
multi-million dollar companies are using
all day long right now to reliably move
the needle for their clients so that you
as a AI consultant, freelancer, or
agency can stop competing on price and
start competing on things that actually
really matter like business insight and
strategy. All right, so first before I
go frameworks, uh two main takeaways
from working with consultants over the
last few weeks. Number one, most of the
principles behind AI consulting are
literally just consulting. Nothing super
special there. AI in these organizations
is actually treated as the least
important part of the AI consulting
service. And the reason why is because
AI hasn't actually made anything
possible that was not possible before.
All it has done is increase the
efficiency with which you can do things.
So the only real leverage is applying AI
to pre-existing business flows that are
already producing some measurable
capital. Um it is definitely not in
inventing something new with AI or
applying AI to a completely new domain
or business problem. Okay? And it makes
sense because it's trained off of data
that human beings created. So what this
means for us is if you learn consulting
concepts as opposed to a bunch of
technical stuff, uh you will become much
more adept at solving real business
problems with AI. My second point is
that consulting is really just thinking.
So the best consultants are typically
the best thinkers. Consulting, at least
if you're really good at it, is
basically just the science of being
effective and involves a lot of
pre-existing frameworks that people have
been coming up with over the course of
decades and hundreds of years to guide
through decisions. So if you guys want
to become better thinkers, we can start
by taking a lot of what consulting has
already done for us. They've already
carved out a big chunk of the path and
applying that to our own lives, whether
or not it's in business. Okay. So let's
actually go through the four main
overarching frameworks that AI
consultants are using today. The first
is one of the very first things that any
consultant will learn. It's called the
driver tree. And in short, the driver
tree is a systematic way of identifying
the drivers behind a business problem.
What you do is you list your goal and
then you reverse engineer from your goal
to find the drivers that actually move
that goal forward, make it happen. Then
once you do that, you can start working
on the drivers themselves. You just
rinse and repeat to find the things that
drive the drivers. So most newbies in
any sort of businessto business
scenario, you know, they'll land their
first client and their first client will
say something like, "Hey, our ads aren't
working." And because the newbies are
super enthusiastic and they don't really
understand how clients work, they'll
take those clients at face value and
then immediately start pitching
solutions and building things out to,
you know, improve the stated problem.
But this loses the forest for the trees.
Now, it will also lose you as a
consultant a ton of money. and it will
impair your ability to drive real
business outcomes because there is a
difference between a stated need and
then an implicit need, a thing that
somebody is not telling you. So instead,
you can deliver way more value by just
walking through a simple driver tree.
Here's how it works. First, you define
your goal in the simplest terms. So that
might be growing revenue, increasing
profit, uh improving retention. And I
wouldn't over complicate this part.
They're generally a handful of stated
business goals that any client out there
is looking to achieve. uh sometimes they
are implicit which means you must
determine them for yourself and then put
them in front of them. But yeah really
the only key guiding principle here is
you have to be specific. You cannot just
say I want to grow my business. You
instead need to provide a specific
metric uh an amount to grow that metric
and then a time period within which to
do so. So I'll give you an example.
Let's say your goal is I want to double
my topline revenue in the next year. We
have a metric which is the revenue. We
have the amount which is double and we
have the time period which is the year.
Okay. Second, you must identify the
minimum essential drivers to achieve
that goal. And ideally, you would aim
for two to four major drivers. If you do
any more, you're probably overthinking
it or over complicating it. The way that
I see things is I use AAM's Razer here,
which is a thinking tool that basically
says the simplest answer is probably the
right one. Uh so, for example, if your
goal is to double your topline revenue
in the next year, you have some pretty
clear drivers. You can either get more
customers or you could increase the
lifetime value of existing customers.
The third is you take that and you drill
down from the driver one layer deeper.
So here the exact same principles apply.
You keep it simple. For instance, how do
you get more customers, right? Well, you
can put your offer in front of more
people, which is marketing. And you can
also increase the conversion rate of the
people who have your offer in front of
them, which is sales. How about
increasing the lifetime value? Well, you
can reduce the churn. You can increase
the cost of the product. Right? Now,
you're seeing we're basically
constructing this tree of concepts and
drivers. And finally, if necessary, you
drill down one layer deeper. Now, how do
you do all the things that we just
talked about? Well, here's where you're
probably going to get hyper specific
with, you know, your actual business
details and the implementation. So, for
instance, in our case, how would I put
my offer in front of more people? I
would create more content, for instance,
or I would improve the engagement and
verality of my current content. Now,
this is just a thinking tool, but the
reason why it works is it basically
forces you to structure and direct those
thoughts. You're not going to win any
awards for this. It's not like you're
going to get a Nobel Prize for any
insights. uh there's there's nothing
novel here, but what you will do is you
will make more money because it turns
out that money making more of it is not
a Nobel Prize or laurate winning
problem. Uh the things that make more
money tend to be very simple and simply
require focus. So the way that I see
driver trees is they're basically a
forcing function for clarity. Okay, let
me give you a real example from our
community. Aar who's one of the members
who'd only building automations for a
few months was approached by a client
who was struggling with their sales
team's productivity. Now, the client
thought that their problem was that they
needed more leads. Aar could have just
gone and, you know, built the whole lead
genen system for them, which is
obviously something that we talk a fair
amount about in the program. But
instead, he kept things really simple
and he reframed the client's goal using
a driver tree. So, what he asked was,
"What's your actual goal?" And turns out
their actual goal was to increase
revenue without adding more sales reps.
They wanted to keep a pretty lean team.
So the main drivers to hitting that goal
are lead quantity, lead quality and then
conversion efficiency. Basically the
conversion rate and how quickly and
easily you can convert somebody. So when
uh him and the client looked at the
data, you know, the company already had
a massive database of contacts. So it
wasn't the lead quantity that was the
issue. What they found was the real
bottleneck was lead quality. So every
time a rep had to deal with a new lead,
they spent hours researching every
account, pulling, you know, tiny little
scraps of data from LinkedIn websites
and Google. and they tended to do so in
a pretty undirected way. So Aar built an
end-to-end enrichment system, meaning
now with just a company website, the
system immediately enriches all 50
fields automatically, which standardizes
the data, pushes all that into
Salesforce, instead of the team having
to waste a bunch of time digging around
for data and not really knowing fully
what the context is before they get into
the call, reps now get complete profiles
and AI processed insights basically
immediately. So all of this despite not
necessarily being what the client
thought that they wanted in the short
term ended up solving their problem.
Okay. So that is the driver tree. The
next thing is even if you identify the
right problem you obviously still need
to understand what metrics are important
how to actually drive business value. So
that's what I want to talk about and
what this really is is business acumen.
So as people offering a service like AI
by default we care mostly about the
implementation details of that service.
And if that sounds like French to you,
what I mean by this is how many API
calls? Uh what models should we use?
What platforms should we integrate? How
should we drag and drop the nodes? Well,
got a hell of a Eureka moment for you.
Customers, they don't actually care
mostly at all about the fancy technology
that you're going to apply to their
business outside of some superficial or
high level understanding. What they care
about are the outcomes that you are
driving. Now this isn't rocket science
to anybody but in order to frame things
in their perspective what consultants do
is they pitch everything in the context
of three major business outcomes. Okay?
And I call this your business acumen. Uh
you knowing this is basically the 8020
of consulting and no you don't have to
go get an MBA uh like the big four guys
that I'm working with. Uh you can just
spend 5 minutes running through some of
this and you should have more or less
everything you need to know. So what is
business acumen? It is the ability to
understand how businesses actually
create, lose, and then measure value.
You can bin this into three major
outcomes. As I mentioned, first and
obvious one is profit equals revenue
minus costs. It's a very classic
framework that I think we're probably
all familiar with. Every business
decision ultimately impacts some measure
of this equation. And obviously, we can
go really deep. We could start figuring
out uh gross margin and operational
margin and so on and so forth, but
honestly, for the most part, literally,
this is sufficient. The second big
framework is growth equals acquisition
plus retention plus expansion. Now this
might be a little bit more complicated.
So what the heck does this mean? Well,
you either bring in new customers in a
business which is acquisition or you
keep existing ones which is retention or
you sell more to the ones you already
have which is expansion. So let's say
you have a monthly retainer for a
consulting firm and it has a 50% monthly
churn rate. Okay, that means for every 2
months that somebody stays with you,
somebody leaves. I.e. the average uh
relationship length is around 2 months.
Well, you could focus your time, effort,
and money on getting new customers for
the service. And of course, that would
probably improve your topline revenue to
some degree. But the much more effective
thing to do would be to reduce your
churn, aka improve your retention. So,
using this formula, you would be
foregoing acquisition to focus on the
retention. And while it's not always the
best play, uh, in this situation,
retention is just so much cheaper per
unit work to move than acquisition. So,
it's, you know, what I'd recommend
doing. Okay, so that's the first two.
The third is something you guys probably
haven't thought about, which is that
value equals cash flow divided by risk.
Now, this is a valuation mindset instead
of a usual accounting one. Probably is
not going to mean a lot to people here.
So, um, you know, we all come from a
services background. Let me run you
through this. The higher the cash flow
and the lower the risk, the more money a
business is worth, aka the higher the
valuation. So, a concrete example is if
you had two SAS companies, both are in
similar industries, and they both make
$100,000 a month in recurring revenue.
Let's say company A has a bunch of very
predictable enterprise clients, and they
have longer contract lengths, you know,
maybe two years or so, whereas company B
tends to work with small to mid-size
businesses, uh, and then they're all on
a month-to-month contract instead. If
you think about it, company A working
with a two-year, you know, enterprise
cycles, uh, which are typically more
stable and less likely to change
vendors. Company A is going to be worth
significantly more than company B simply
by virtue of the fact that it has lower
risk. And if you look at our equation,
because the risk is lower, the total
valuation of the business is going to be
higher. Now, when you're pitching
systems, something to keep in mind,
specifically with automation that not a
lot of people talk about is that risk.
Sometimes AI systems increase risk. So
even if they do increase cash flow, if
the increase in risk offsets the
increase in business value and revenue,
sometimes this isn't actually worth it.
Now obviously this is a you know nuanced
thing. You are happy to increase cash
flow in certain situations. It does mean
you increase risk and I do it all the
time. But in other instances um you know
it does the exact opposite. So sometimes
you will automate a process that used to
be up to a bunch of people and the
people didn't do a very good job and
thus the performance is pretty variable
in output and then because you're
automating you'll actually decrease the
risk. And so those are the situations
that you want to go for as somebody that
is selling AI services or automating
business processes. Right? If you can
find a golden goose scenario where you
both increase cash flow but also
decrease risk, what you're doing is
you're basically multiplying that
equation out many many more times and
improving the total value of the
decision significantly. Another real
example from maker school was a guy
called Nick. Very handsome fellow, I'm
sure. He was working with a real estate
coaching client who wanted an AI
chatbot. uh the stated need there was
you know they wanted to build out some
sort of intelligent visibility dashboard
and he was convinced that the problem
was that he didn't have enough advanced
AI in his business that the AI needed to
be smarter which is obviously a
relatively unsophisticated belief but
Nick drilled down further when he
thought about in the context of business
acumen so the things that we just talked
about profit equals revenue minus costs
growth equals acquisition plus retention
plus expansion Nick found that the real
issue was not the quality of the AI at
all it was the client's churn
essentially the client's turn was just
way too high, which made all of this
unjustifiable to begin with. So instead
of building an AI system or spending a
bunch of time chasing money and and
marginal returns, Nick built a churn
prevention system, essentially AI
personalized onboarding sequences, a
proactive 7-day and 30-day success
check-in, and then a few triggers that
would flag when clients said things
like, "Hey, this feels overwhelming."
before they canceled. And these simple
things, despite not being what the
client asked for, significantly improved
the bottom line and ultimately amount to
the project being a success. So what the
client thought they needed was AI. What
the client really needed was less churn.
The way that you figure this out is
through driver trees and strong business
acumen to build your models with. So
before you pitch any AI solution,
identify which of the three major
formulas you are actually moving. Are
you increasing revenue? Are you
decreasing costs? Are you improving
acquisition or retention or expansion?
Are you decreasing or increasing risk?
Right? And you can do multiple of these
at the same time. In fact, most usually
do. But you'll find that there is one
major thing that a system will do uh
over others. And if you can't answer any
of those questions clearly, in reality,
your client probably won't be able to
either, which means you probably
shouldn't do the thing to begin with.
Okay. So, now we understand how to
diagnose problems that are high leverage
using the principles of both driver
trees and then also business acumen. But
there's still two more frameworks that I
want to talk about that these big four
consultants uh showed me. And one of
them was very interesting to me and one
that I never really sat down and thought
about. Uh, and it'll sound very simple,
but it was basically just the principle
of communication. So, you can have the
best ideas in your head, but if you
can't get those ideas across to a
customer, doesn't matter, right? You and
the customer are going to lose. So,
consultants don't just spend all their
time actually just building their ideas
and making themselves better thinkers.
They also work on becoming better
communicators, which if you guys are in
maker school, you guys have seen my
content, is very, very important to your
bottom line. So, I want to start with
what I would call probably the most
important communication principle I
learned in consulting, which I was
already doing, but I didn't fully
realize, and it's called the pyramid
principle. Uh, in the pyramid principle,
it's very simple. You just state the
conclusion first. Then you supply any
supporting arguments after. Basically,
you're not like burying the lead. Most
people will do this backwards. They will
start with a bunch of context. They'll
build up a compelling story and
narrative, and then finally, they will
at the very bottom of the thing get to
the point. uh by the time they reach the
conclusion, the client has probably
already come up to their own conclusion
or just stopped paying attention because
everybody skims nowadays. So, as a
quick example of the pyramid principle,
let's say my goal is to grow the revenue
of maker school to 200% in the next 12
months, right? That is a driver tree
style goal. If I was communicating this
to myself, I would first use driver
trees to determine the factors of my
200% revenue increase goal, which in
this case is going to be increasing
acquisition, customer transaction
volume, and then lifetime value. Right?
I would then write this goal. I would
put it first and then I would explain
how after. Uh I'm just going to pull
something out of my ass here, but to
grow the revenue of Maker School by 200%
in 12 months. Uh we can expand who pays,
how much they pay, how long they keep
paying. Uh we can increase customer
acquisition. We can do this through more
traffic. We can do this through more
ads. We can do this through more
partnerships, uh more content, and then
we can also increase the conversion rate
on that traffic. Uh second, we can
increase the average transaction value
of the converted traffic, which we can
do by introducing some sort of upsell,
uh adding some premium tier to Maker
School, adding some private one-on-one
coaching, offering cross cells, uh
templates, playbooks, and automation
bundles. And finally, we can increase
the uh customer lifetime value itself,
which we can do by increasing retention
through better community ties, more
touch points, structured progress
tracking, reducing some form of churn
with, I don't know, accountability, all
stuff that I am myself actually doing.
But anyway, the point that I'm making is
we started with the thing that we wanted
to do, right? The goal and then after we
stated the goal and the client bought
into the goal, then we supported it with
a bunch of stated actions that we are
saying are likely to actually improve
the goal. Okay, this is how you get buy
in. Another big principle is when you
are pitching a consultant always start
with the problem first. So, uh,
practically what that means is if you're
creating a proposal for some service,
like don't start with the executive
abstract. You know, don't start with
company whatever is a $5 million per
year business in the XYZ industry that
does blank. Uh, cuz nobody really cares
about that. You're just wasting
character space. Instead, start with the
problem the customer is suffering from,
right? Leftclick is currently spending
$45,000 on customer acquisition and
seeing next to no returns. This is
crippling growth because you don't
really have that much cash flow to begin
with. That makes it an existential risk,
right? Right? If you put that problem in
front of people and if they resonate
with that problem and then you support
it with conclusions, people are going to
be a lot more likely to like listen to
you because you're not bearing the lead
you're putting in front of them, but
also actually like take your advice
seriously and do something about it.
Okay, so in a nutshell, once you are
done identifying and quantifying the
problem, okay, once you start with the
end and then you frontload what the need
is, then and only then do you actually
focus on the solution. All right, the
last major consulting framework is fast
and it is a model not just for
consulting but for better
decision-making too. So, I learned this
from watching those big four guys work.
It is essentially a four-step process
you can apply to any problem, whether
it's a business problem or a personal
problem to guide your thinking.
Effective consulting is effective
thinking. So, if you don't structure
your thinking in some way, you are
usually leaving some sort of outcome on
the table. This will help stop that. And
the way it works is the F stands for
first principles. This is where you
strip a problem into its fundamentals.
You rebuild that from the ground up. You
do not accept assumptions. uh practical
example instead of you know we need to
automate our invoicing process which is
a solution that you are pre-imposing on
the problem you know start with no prior
solution just ask yourself what the
hell's the problem what's the
straightest line path to fixing the
problem right so instead of hey we need
to automate our invoicing process ask
what do I want well I want to get paid
faster and then you use that driver tree
idea to figure out where to apply your
time and your effort A stands for
actionoriented so focus on what can be
implemented and action in the next 24
hours not on some perfect solution which
will take months or years to generate
uh basically you just want to bias
yourself and your organization towards
doing something rather than sitting
around in your ass and planning all day.
So instead of you know let's research uh
all the CRM options for 3 months and
then make a decision you should know
that like the probability of you making
a good decision with no actual real
world market feedback is quite low. So
say something like hey why don't we pick
the top two CRM today? Why don't we just
like both uh run them in parallel for a
week trial and then at the end of that
week trial we'll decide and just move
forward. It's like yeah will that be the
perfect decision? probably not. But if
it's like 90% of the way to a perfect
decision and you do it in like onetenth
of the time, that's massive leverage. S
stands for second order thinking. So we
got the first principles down and now we
have the action down. What we need to do
is basically go one step further and
assuming what we're thinking of
implementing works out, we need to
consider the outcome beyond the
immediate. So what happens if this thing
works, you know, or what happens if it
doesn't work? Instead of saying, "Hey,
this chatbot will handle 80% of support
tickets," uh, you should say, "If the
chatbot handles 80% of support tickets,
what the hell happens next? Are we going
to be able to deal with that? And if
not, how do we implement another
solution to deal with the inevitable
bottleneck that we're going to be
creating?" And then finally, T stands
for triangulation. This is really
important. Once you've gone through this
process of thinking through first
principles, then making your stuff
actionable and then considering the the
second order consequences of your idea
and then laying it all out in front of
you, then and only then do you
triangulate this information with some
other data source. Why? Because in this
way you are forced to think through a
problem yourself first and your
conclusions will not be constrained or
colored or biased by somebody else's
work. I see it really similarly to like
doing your homework yourself first. uh
you know to like learn the concepts and
and so on and so forth before checking
the answer book after. You would never
check the answer book before if you
really wanted to learn something right
like because then that's just
memorization. So instead you you focus
on applying first principles to a
problem. Focus on your own human
intellect and applying that to a system
then after you are done and you have
some stated hypothesis with some stated
solution. Then check to see what other
people did. That's how you end up with
novel creative solutions that win and
then drive disproportionate outcomes.
Okay. Okay, so here's a real example
from our community. Maxi Maximillian,
he's one of our members who was
consulting for a client in the
healthcare industry. Uh he was
approached with what looked like a very
simple request which was hey can you
build me an AI transcription model for
doctors and this is very very
stereotypical fast. So thinking about it
through fast first principles instead of
accepting the problem as just stated he
just asked hey do we actually need to
build a new AI model for this? And what
he quickly realized was no you don't
need to build a new AI model for this.
All you need to do is find a way to
record audio and then just get it
transcribed accurately, right? Like
that's really the constraints of the
problem if you just approach it from a
first principles perspective. So the
fundamental requirement was literally
just a microphone in the room and then
he needed to be able to send it off to
some sort of transcription thing.
Building a model was just a suggestion
that the client had sent him because
they did not fully understand what the
technology behind that meant. Building a
model is a very involved process, right?
You need AI engineers. You need uh uh
you know tons of data. You need like a
massive massive data pipeline and just
way more in the way of hardware,
servers, and work than most people would
ever be able to accomplish on their own.
But using a pre-existing transcription
model, well, that's an entirely
different story. So next, actionoriented
uh rather than building like some full
stack app with a custom AI model, all he
did was he identified a very simple
test. Okay, it was basically like a
pilot. Hey, can I do a voice recording?
Send it to uh some pre-existing model
and then get that summarized. And it was
a very very tiny little MVP that you
could literally implement with an hour
to let the client know yes, this is
possible or no, this isn't. Okay, so
after that second order thinking, which
is where you ask yourself, hey, if this
works, what the hell happened? So
assuming that he solved this problem,
which he was obviously going to do. It's
not a very complicated system. What
happens next? Well, the company would
obviously want to implement it, right?
And if that occurred, what gives? Well,
as we know in the medical industry, we
have a lot of compliance issues. And so
HIPPA compliance for instance was going
to matter a lot to medical records for
that business. So he went and he checked
to see what were the penalties if I
broke this compliance. And then he
quickly realized that he needed a
solution to avoid breaking the
compliance which was either local models
or some sort of secure infrastructure.
And then finally triangulation instead
of reinventing the whole wheel now he
just looked to see if there were any
existing tools and there ended up being
some commir and caragon that were
available that would already do what he
was asking. So I use fast every week
with my own clients at leftclick. When a
client comes to me with some sort of
very complex automation request, I do
not immediately start mapping out their
workflow. I will run it through fast,
which in reality is a 5 to 10 minute
process. It is not a very long or
difficult thing to do. And if it makes
sense, and only if it makes sense do I
continue. If it doesn't, I will discuss
it with the client. Now, I've used
frameworks like this over the course of
the last couple years to make hundreds
of thousands of dollars in agency work.
It is very, very straightforward to do,
and I'd highly recommend thinking about
every project that you take from here on
out in that way. All right, so to wrap
things up, here are how these four
frameworks work together. First, you
start with driver trees to identify what
actually matters in a business. Uh
business acumen then ensures that you
are moving the actual right levers and
that you know what it is that you are
trying to do. Uh communication then gets
clients to say yes to your solutions.
And then fast makes everything
systematic, repeatable. Then it's also a
thinking tool that extends outside of
just business. So I very much
transitioned from just an automation
builder a few years ago to a
full-fledged like systems consultant.
Instead of just selling AI tools, I
actually help companies think through
problems systematically and that is the
bulk of what I get paid for. AI is just
one of the many levers that I could
pull. Uh and the technical
implementation, while fun and enjoyable
and also pretty interesting, uh is not
the thing that ends up making me most
the money, it is the way that I approach
business problem solving. So, if you
want to see how Leftclick, my company,
applies this thinking to real business
problems, feel free to book a call with
my team. We will walk you through your
specific situation using these
frameworks and also show you exactly how
to drive revenue, improve your margins,
and reduce risk in your business. Also
obligatory, if you like this sort of
stuff and maybe want to start your own
AI consulting outfit, definitely check
out Maker School. It's my 90-day
accountability program where I guarantee
you your first paying customer for an AI
or no code tool related service in 90
days or your money back. Thank you very
much for watching. Hope you guys found
this valuable and have a lovely rest of
the day. Bye.